The Rest Controller
===================

## Using the RestController
The Rest Controller is going to be your best friend for rapid API development. To
use it, simply make your controllers extend the `MNC\RestBundle\Controller\RestController`
class.

    <?php
    
    namespace App\Controller;
    
    use MNC\RestBundle\Controller\RestController;
    
    /**
     * Class PostController
     * @package App\Controller
     * @author Matías Navarro Carter <mnavarro@option.cl>
     * @Route("/posts")
     */
    class PostController extends RestController
    {
        
    }

Now, there's something very important `RestController` needs in order to work properly, and that is
the `@Resource` annotation. I will not work its magic for you if you don't
declare it. Let's do it!

    <?php
        
    namespace App\Controller;
    
    use MNC\RestBundle\Controller\RestController;
    use MNC\RestBundle\Annotation\Resource;
    
    /**
     * Class PostController
     * @package App\Controller
     * @author Matías Navarro Carter <mnavarro@option.cl>
     * @Route("/posts")
     * @Resource("post", 
     *     relatedEntity="CoreBundle\Entity\Post", 
     *     formClass="ApiBundle\Form\PostForm", 
     *     transformerClass="ApiBundle\Transformer\PostTransformer")
     */
    class PostController extends RestController
    {
        
    }
    
The `@Resource` annotation takes four string values, the first one being a simple
string that will define the **singular simple name of your resource**, and the last three
are some really important FQCNs (Fully Qualified Class Names).

If those three classes exist, then you will be ready to leverage all the power 
`RestController` has to offer you. Here is a summary of what they are:

- **relatedEntity**: This will be the FQCN of the entity associated with this resource. It is
necesary since it is used to call the Entity Repository. You can learn more about Doctrine entities
in the official documentation.
- **formClass**: This will be the FQCN of the form class used when creating and updating 
this entity/resource. You can learn about Symfony forms in the official documentation.
- **transformerClass**: This will be the FQCN of the transformer class. The transformer 
class is the class that contains all the logic to transform a in-memory php object 
representation of your resource (Entity) into an array that can be easily converted 
into a json string. This transformer has special habilities that you can learn reading 
[the docs for the Entity Transformer](2.entity-transformers.md).

Please keep the namespace of these classes consistent. They are not required to 
be the same in here in order for this library to work, but it is good practice 
to organize your namespaces this way.

## The Rest Controller Listener
All the data you defined in the Resource anotation is captured by a listener
to the `kernel.controller` event. It defines some properties in your controller, and
puts some interesting data in the request atttributes so you can reuse it in your services.

What it does is that it creates a `RestInfo` object, that implements the `RestInfoInterface`.
That object stores all the information relative to the resource you are dealing with.
You can access that object from your controller using the `getRestInfo()` method.

Also, if you defined a `ResourceManager`, in your entity, the `RestInfo` object will
be available there as well.

## RestController Convinience Methods

### The Resource Response and Fractalize Methods
There are some useful methods you get when using the `RestController`, the most
useful probably being `createResourceResponse($data, $statusCode, array $headers)`.

This method is pure magic. Pass it some data, a status code and some custom headers 
if you want, and it will create a `JsonResponse` containing a paginated collection (if multiple
records are to be listed) or a single resource. It works at it's best when you
pass it an instance of `QueryBuilder` that is ready to be fetched. This method
will make your life so easy that you will use it everywhere. It abstracts all the
pagination logic for you.

It paginates results based on two query params: `page` and `size`. If none of them
are present, it defaults to `1` and `10` respectively.

The logic that this method (`createResourceResponse`) contains is the following:
    
    // Calls the fractalizer service, passing the data and the transformer as a service
    // asociated to the entity you are trying to transform. 
    $array = $this->fractalize($data, $this->get($this->transformer));
    
    // Then, the normalized data is returned and casted into Json.
    return JsonResponse::create($array, $statusCode, $headers);
    
If you want to know more about the Fractalizer service, check [the docs for the 
fractalizer](3.fractalizer.md). There's a lot going on in that service.

Of course, you can skip the `createResourceResponse` method, and proceed to
normalize/transform directly with the fractalizer, using the `fractalize` method
in your controller. This will return an array ready to be casted into Json, XML,
or any other format you want.

### Throwing exceptions
There are some useful methods to throw exceptions inside your controller, and then
let our `ExceptionListener` take care of the response formatting.

Rest Controller overrides the default `createNotFoundException` and `createAccessDeniedException`
from Symfony's `ControllerTrait`. You also have a `createBadRequestException` method. All these
take a message - a human readable description of the problem ocurred so 
your api consumers can understand what went wrong - as the first optional argument. This
message will later become the 'details' key in your response.

Theres also a `createValidationErrorException` that takes your Form as a argument. If your
form is sent and contains errors, it creates a response with the errors serialized.

You can also throw an `ApiProblemException` by creating a `ApiProblem` object. Check
[the docs for the APi Problem RFC 7807 implementation](5.api-problem.md) for more info.

### Other Handy Methods
The `getManager()` method will return an instance of Doctrine's Entity Manager or
your Resource Manager if you configured one ([see Resource Manager Docs](9.resource_manager.md)). 
You also have easy access to the entity repository by calling `getRepo()` method.

You can also fetch a resource by it's id with the `getResourceByIdentifierQuery($id)` method.
Basically, pass it the identifier value of a resource and it will find it for you. The `$id` can
also be a set of ids separated by commas, and it will return a collection of those specific 
resources.

Finally, there's a handy method that uses the routing service to build a url for 
created resources. It's called `buildLocationHeaderUrl($entity, $route = null)`.

## RestfulActions Trait
There's a trait you can add to your controllers called `RestfulActionsTrait`. To
use it, simply do:

    <?php
            
    namespace App\Controller;
    
    use MNC\RestBundle\Controller\RestController;
    use MNC\RestBundle\Controller\RestfulActionsTrait;
    use MNC\RestBundle\Annotation\Resource;
    
    /**
     * Class PostController
     * @package App\Controller
     * @author Matías Navarro Carter <mnavarro@option.cl>
     * @Route("/posts")
     * @Resource("post", 
     *     relatedEntity="CoreBundle\Entity\Post", 
     *     formClass="ApiBundle\Form\PostForm", 
     *     transformerClass="ApiBundle\Transformer\PostTransformer")
     */
    class PostController extends RestController
    {
        use RestfulActionsTrait;
        
        //...
    }

This trait contains a set of 9 Restful methods (routes included) to easily start working with
resources in your controller. This is an overview of the methods:

| Method Signature                         | Uri                      | Method(s)        | Description                                         |
| ---------------------------------------- | ------------------------ | ---------------- | --------------------------------------------------- |
| indexAction(Request $request)            | /resource                | GET              | Returns a collection of resources.                  |
| showAction(Request $request, $id)        | /resource/id             | GET              | Returns a single resource.                          |
| newAction(Request $request)              | /resource/new            | GET              | Returns a Json-Schema form for creating a resource. |
| editAction(Request $request)             | /resource/edit           | GET              | Returns a Json-Schema form for editing a resource.  |
| storeAction(Request $request)            | /resource                | POST             | Creates a resource.                                 |
| updateAction(Request $request, $id)      | /resource/id             | POST, PUT, PATCH | Edits a resource. PATCH is idempotent.              |
| deleteAction(Request $request, $id)      | /resource/id             | DELETE           | Deletes a resource.                                 |
| indexSubresourceAction(Request $request) | /resource/id/subresource | GET              | Returns a collection of subresources.               |
| storeSubresourceAction(Request $request) | /resource/id/subresource | POST             | Creates a new subresource.                          |

Once you declare this trait in your controller, you will be able to use these methods
as long as you have correctly declared your Entity, Form and Transformer classes.

## Overriding the RestController
Maybe you want to use the `RestfulAction` trait but you need something custom in
one of your methods. It doesn't matter: simply override it by creating a new 
implementation of the method. Don't forget to register the routes!

Now, you should learn about the [Entity Transformers](2.entity-transformers.md).