Api Problem RFC7807
===================

## Error Standards in APIs
If there is one word that must drive your API development is **consistency**. A good
API, no matter the standard you follow, is going to be a consistent one. One of the 
main reasons for this bundle is to provide you with tools that will give you consistency,
so you worry about only developing your API.

For that reason, some specifications have been made to define a error format that
can be followed by APIs. One of these is the **[RFC 7807 API Problem Details](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7807)**.

## The `ApiProblem` Class
This is a class that only contains the four properties defined in the RFC:
- Type: A uri reference that identifies the problem type.
- Title: A short, human-readable summary of the problem type.
- Status: The http status code.
- Detail: A human readable explanation relative to this ocurrence of the problem.
- Instance: A URI reference that identifies the specific ocurrence of the problem.

You can easily create an instance of an ApiProblem, either using the constructor 
method or the factory one. The only argument you need to provide is the status code.
The title and the type will take the HTTP status code definition if not provided.

    $apiProblem = ApiProblem::create(404);

## Casting Api Problems
You can cast this class into a series of useful representations. When you are in
a controller, you can create an Api Problem formatted response very easily.

    $apiProblem = ApiProblem::create(404, sprintf('Resource %s not found', $resourceId));
    
    return $apiProblem->toJsonResponse();
    
This will return the following response. Please note the content-type:
    
    HTTP/1.1 404 Not Found
    Content-Type: application/problem+json
    
    {
        "status": 404,
        "type": "about:blank",
        "title": "Not Found",
        "detail": "Resource 5 not found."
    }

If you are in some part of your application where you cannot interrupt the flow 
to return a response, you can throw an `ApiProblemException` that will be handled 
by an exception listener.

    $apiProblem = ApiProblem::create(401, 'You do not have access to see this resource.');
    
    $apiProblem->throwException();
    
You can also cast your `ApiProblem` to an array using `toArray()` method or just 
create an instance of `ApiProblemException` without throwing it with `toException()`.

You can set extra keys and values for the response using the `set()` method.

This is all you need to know about `ApiProblem`. Maybe you should check the RFC if 
you want to know more about the details of the specification. Now, it the turn of
the Security and the [Onwable Interface](6.ownable-interface.md).